In William Shakespeare’s play Romeo and Juliet, there are several
characters that experience significant evolution. They are Romeo,
Juliet, and Lord Capulet and Lord Montague. Romeo becomes more
impulsive, passionate, and serious; Juliet becomes determined and
responsible; and Lord Capulet and Lord Montague change from bitterness
to peacefulness. This story is based on tragic love story in which two
families are enemies and their children fall in love. This story took
place in Verona.  Romeo is a foolish boy in the opening of the play
but Romeo experience significant evolution when he meets Juliet; he
became impulsive, passionate, and serious. In the beginning of the
play, Romeo is in love with Rosaline but he is not serious for her
love. Instead of expressing his love towards Rosaline, he sets and
cries for her. This shows that he was not serious towards her love and
he was just acting foolish. After when Romeo meets Juliet he starts to
change, he falls in love with Juliet and forgets Rosaline, he became
more passionate and expressed his love towards Juliet, he also became
impulsive and got married with Juliet as soon as he can, and he also
became serious along the play. By the end of the play, Romeo decides
to kill himself because he sees Juliet dead in the coffin and he
became hopeless and dies. This shows that he is really serious for
Juliet and he can’t image his life without her. This is how Romeo
experiences significant evolution in the play.  Juliet also makes a
transition from pliant to determined and responsible girl. In the
beginning of the play; Juliet use to obey everything to what her
mother use to ask for “madam, I am here. What is your will” (says
Juliet to her mother. Act 1, scene 3 line 7). She also never took
marriage that serious but when she meets Romeo she started
changing. Juliet gets married with Romeo without telling her family
and afterwards she tried to convince her family that she is dead bec
One of the most important issues in the tragedy of Romeo and Juliet is
that of choice. Do the characters have the ability to choose what they
want to do, or are they simply destined to participate in death and
destruction? There is ample evidence of both fate and free will in the
play, and the presence of both greatly affects the interpretation of
the plot and the characters.

Fate as a dominating force is evident from the very beginning of the
play. The Chorus introduces the power of fortune in the opening
prologue when we are told that Romeo and Juliet are “star-crossed”
(destined for bad luck) and “death-marked,” and that their death will
end their parents’ feud. Fate and fortune are closely related in the
play, as they both concern events that are out of human control. By
telling us that Romeo and Juliet are destined to die because of their
bad luck, Shakespeare gives us the climax of the play before it even
begins. This strategy, which seems odd considering the end has been
spoiled for the audience, serves two purposes: it allows the
introduction of the power of fate and fortune over people’s lives by
declaring the fate of Romeo and Juliet at the very beginning, and it
also creates tension throughout the play because they very nearly
succeed despite this terrible declaration. Thus the opening prologue
sets up the fate/free will problem.

The characters themselves all believe that their lives are controlled
by destiny and luck, and Romeo is a prime example of this. When Romeo
and his friends journey to the Capulet’s ball in Act I, scene iv,
Romeo hesitates to go because he has had a bad dream:

...[M]y mind misgivesSome consequence, yet hanging in the stars,Shall bitterly begin his fearful dateWith this night’s revels and expire the termOf a despised life, closed in my breast,By some vile forfeit of untimely death (I, iv. 106-111).

Romeo not only acknowledges the power of the stars, which tell what
fate has in store through astrology, but he also believes that his
destiny is to die. Romeo’s belief in fate also affects his
interpretation of events. When Romeo kills Tybalt in Act III, scene i,
he claims that he is “fortune’s fool” by having contributed to his own
downfall. In Act V, scene i, Romeo demonstrates his belief in the
power of dreams to foretell the future once again when he believes
that he will be reunited with Juliet on the basis of another
dream. However, when Balthasar informs him that Juliet is dead, Romeo
once again rails against the power of fate: “Is it e’en so? Then I
defy you, stars! / Thou knowest my lodging” (V, i. 24). Romeo finally
tries to escape from his destiny at the end of the play by committing
suicide to “shake the yoke of inauspicious stars,” ironically
fulfilling the destiny declared by the Chorus in the opening prologue.
Other characters in the play believe in the power of fate as
well. Juliet appeals to fortune when Romeo escapes to Mantua in Act
III, scene v:

“O Fortune, Fortune! All men call thee fickle. If thou art fickle,
what dost thou with himThat is renowned for faith? Be fickle,
Fortune,For then I hope thou wilt not keep him longBut send him back”
(III, v. 60-64).

Juliet demonstrates here that she not only believes in the power of
luck and fate over her own situation, but that Romeo himself has faith
in those concepts. Friar Laurence also shows his belief in the power
of destiny over people. When Romeo runs to his cell after killing
Tybalt, Friar Laurence acknowledges that Romeo does indeed have bad
luck: “Affliction is enamored of thy parts, / And thou art wedded to
calamity” (III, iii. ll.2-3). As a priest, Friar Laurence naturally
believes that destiny exists, as God has planned out all
events. However, the friar will also become a victim of fate by the
end of the play. His letter to Romeo, which details Friar Laurence’s
plan for Romeo to pick up Juliet at the Capulet tomb after she has
awakened from the effects of the potion, could not be delivered
because of the “unfortunate” quarantine of Friar John. Friar Laurence
then has the misfortune of accidentally tripping over gravestones
while running to meet Juliet, which delays his arrival until after
Romeo has committed suicide. Friar Laurence recognizes the power of
fate to overrule his good intentions when Juliet awakens: “A greater
power than we can contradict / Hath thwarted our intents” (V,
iii. ll.153-154). The fact that Friar Laurence, Juliet, Romeo, and the
other characters in the play believe so strongly in fate and fortune
is not surprising, given.
